Course specific prerequisites
To be eligible for the course Empirical Software Engineering the student should have a bachelor degree in Software Engineering, Computer Science or equivalent.

Aim
Software development organizations need to constantly improve to become faster, better, and more efficient. This course aims to learn scientific approaches, in particular experiments and statistics, for data collection e.g. as a basis for analysis and decision support in initiatives to improve performances in software development organizations. The course prepares students for the master thesis project and improves the student’s ability to conduct PhD studies.

Learning outcomes (after completion of the course the student should be able to)
1. Knowledge and understanding:
a. Describe the principles of empiricism in software engineering.
b. Describe the principles of case study research/experiments/surveys.
c. Describe the principles of meta-analytical studies.
d. Explain the importance of research ethics.
e. Recognise and define code of ethics for when conducting research in software
engineering.
f. Discuss and explain the most common ethical models in research.
g. State and explain the importance of threats to validity and how to control
said threats.


2. Skills and abilities:

a. Design an empirical study.

b. Analyse descriptive statistics and decide on appropriate analysis methods.

c. Use and interpret code of ethics for software engineering research.



3. Judgement and approach:

a. State and discuss the tools used for data analysis and, in particular, judge
their output.

b. Judge the appropriateness of particular empirical methods and their
applicability to solve various and disparate software engineering problems.

c. Question and assess common ethical issues in software engineering research.

Content
This course is for students who are interested in the empirical methods applied to the field of software engineering. The course introduces quantitative and qualitative methods in software engineering with accompanying statistical methods used for analysis.

The course contains:
1. Descriptive and inferential statistical methods applied to software engineering.
2. Conducting qualitative and quantitative methods in software engineering.
3. Methods for analysing quantitative and qualitative data in software engineering.
4. Usage of statistical tools.

Organisation
The course introduces quantitative and qualitative methods in software engineering research with accompanying statistical methods used for analysis.

The course contains: Descriptive and inferential statistical methods applied to software engineering. Conducting qualitative and quantitative methods in software engineering. Methods for analysing quantitative and qualitative data in software engineering. Usage of statistical tools.

Literature
We will use different textbooks and research articles for different parts. More information will be given before the course starts.

Examination including compulsory elements
The course is examined by three written lab assignments carried out in groups of normally 3-4 students. The course is also examined by an individual written hall-exam. The assignments are both theoretical and practical in nature.